Good morning.  Today, we would like to spend a few minutes talking
about a method for modelling translational efficiency and programmed
frameshifts in ecoli.  Before we begin, we would like to tell you a
little story.  Insulin was sequenced in 1949.  Sanger won the Nobel
prize for his work in 1959.  Yet, it was not until 1979 that one
company, after 30 years of trial and error, managed to come up with
a sequence that could produce insulin a commerically viable rates.
Now of course, insulin is a "tricky" protein for multiple reasons--many
of which are beyond the scope of this presentation, but it is often
true that useful proteins that express highly in humans and other organisms
just don't want to work in ecoli.

Our model may help tackle this issue.  We propose that it can predict
translational efficiency, serving as a preliminary alternative for 
biological testing, thus greatly reducing the time and money necessary 
to develop useful sequences.  This model has applications to medicine, 
like the insulin example we mentioned, agriculture--bovine growth hormone,
and industry in general.

Before we begin, we would like to briefly review ribosomal
translation. Two ribosomal subunits bind to the messenger RNA strand,
forming part of the initiation complex. The ribosomal RNA moves down
the mRNA strand, synthesizing the protein. At each group of three
nucleotides--a codon--a transfer RNA molecule brings a specific amino
acid matching those three letters. Through peptide bonds, the amino
acids form a protein.

During translation, the 16S rRNA tail in the 30S complex--these are
part of the subunits--hybridizes with the mRNA strand according to
Weiss, a researcher. Through this, free energy arises that drive the
motion of the ribosome along the mRNA as explained by Starmer and
later Ponnala. Using the thermodynamic model developed by Starmer, our
model can plot the instantaneous free energy at each binding of the
16S tail to 12 nucleotides of the mRNA strand. Ponnala noticed a
periodicity of 1/3 cycles in the free energy signal, corresponding to
a period of one codon. From this, he hypothesized that the free energy
plays a crucial role in the movement of the ribosome, forming the
basis of his computational model.

We can calculate the force of acting upon the ribosome that determines
its displacement from the correct reading frame by differentiating the
potential energy with respect to distance along the mRNA strand. Other
factors that affect the force include tRNA availability and
displacement from the current reading frame. [elaborate]

In our stochastic model, probability becomes prescient at each juncture
of translation when the ribosome must choose a codon. We propose that the
probability of choosing a codon in a certain reading frame is positively 
correlated with the exposureof the ribosome to the reading frame.  We 
model this correlation by asserting that the probability is proportional
to a sinusoidal function of the displacement.  In essence, as the ribosome
moves farther away from the reading frame, the probability of choosing
the codon in that reading frame should decrease, as the cosine function
indicated.  The sin function indicates that moving towards the +1 reading
frame should increase the probability of choosing the codon in that 
frame.  The tenth power in our model is another parameter--it can be
any even number; we just use 10.

Also, the probability of choosing a codon should be inversely proportional
to its tRNA avaliability in the cell.  The constant n reflects this notion.
We model each phase of elongation as divided into "wait cycles."  Ponnala
introduced this concept, assigning to each codon a specific number of wait
cycles.  Our constant is derived from the normalization assumption that
after Ponnala's number of cycles, the probability of having selected that
codon should be 1/2.

This diagram summarizes our model.  At each wait cycle, we calculate probabilites,
move the ribosome a little bit, and randomly decide either to choose a codon
or a wait for another cycle, recalculating probabilities and moving the
ribosome a bit more.

We developed an animation to explain our model.  The box on the top represents
the position of the ribosome.  Note that the sine curve on the bottom is
determined from the phase of the free energy signal.  The ribosome (the box) moves
according to its position on the sine curve, following the force.
After selecting the codon, the sine curve changes a bit, depending on 
the new phase calculated from the new binding energy.

We can summarize these findings in two plots.  This plot shows the displacement
of the ribosome (the box) as a function of codon number.  As you can see, 
there is some variation, although the plot remains close to the horizontal axis. 

This plot
shows the phase of the free energy--in other words, how much the sine curve
changed.  Note that the curve remains near the -30 degree mark.  This angle
is referred to as the species angle, since it is the average angle to which
the free energy plots of genes in ecoli tend.  
This protein, if you were interested, is aspS, which is a tRNA synthetase.

Now, there are a few proteins that are especially interesting.  Look at this
animation, for the protein prfB, a protein release factor in ecoli.
Notice that the ribosome moves one entire nucleotide in displacement.  This
phenomenon is known as a frameshift--when one entire nucleotide is skipped
during translation.  The ribosome enters the +1 reading frame.

The displacement plot of the frameshifter shows a distinct jump towards the
x = 2 mark, indicating the biologically verified shift to the +1 frame.  The
polar plot indicates a strange counterclockwise curve, representing the 
unstable point through which the ribosome passes.  If we zoom out on the polar
plot, we see that it tends not to -30 degrees, but to -150 degrees--precisely
120 degrees past the species angle.  Recall the fact that the period of the free
energy was one codon.  Thus, 120 degrees corresponds to a shift in one nucleotide.

We have just touched on the few basic capabilities of the stochastic model.
This model represents an improvement from Ponnala's deterministic model because
it considers the borderline cases; it actually accounts for the situations in which
the ribosome hovers in the plus or minus 1 regions--in the middle of two reading
frames.  It is a more realistic model of the ribosome, as it offers a distinct,
albeit similar, displacement plot every time.  

Yet, we believe that the true power of this stochastic model lies in its ability
to predict translational efficiency--to determine whether a given sequence will
cause signal-encoded problems in translation.  In addition, it also allows for
better parameter estimation.  In fact, we used the outcome of the stochastic 
model to create a genetic algorithm that modified tRNA availiability values
based on a sample set of sequences.

To estimate efficiency, we developed two metrics.  The first one is displacement
deviation, and it is the root mean square distance of the displacement plot
from the horizontal axis.  As the ribosome hovers away
from a reading frame, it will spend more time during translation and have
a greater chance of accidentally picking up the incorrect codon.  Therefore,
low deviation should correspond to higher translational efficiency.

The error-free rate is a metric that measures the number of times the ribosome
selected every codon correctly over the total number of times the simulation is
run.  Obviously, a rate near 1 corresponds to higher translational efficiency.

To measure the efficacy of our model and the utility of these metrics, we ran
a series of investigations.  The first one consisted of using one metric to actually
measure the robustness of the model with respect to intial parameters.  For the
remaining tests, we selected one metric and measured it on a sample set of either
naturally occurring or artificially constructed sequences.

We varied the two most important initial parameters--species angle and initial
displacement--to study the robustness of our model; the metric we used was
error-free rate on prfB over 500 iterations per point.  This plot indicates that
prfB had efr near 1 over a very large range, indicating that our model is not
very sensitive to small fluctuations in the initial parameters.

Our first investigation involves a look a large portion of the genes present naturally
in E coli.  Most biologists contend that translation in prokaryotes is an efficient process;
therefore, it would make sense that the vast majority of proteins in E coli should
exhibit low displacement deviations.  We thus selected a sample of 4364 sequences,
from a list given by the Ecogene database, and calculated their displacement deviations,
running 500 iterations on each gene.  This histogram tabulates the results.  As you can
see, over 90% of proteins have a deviation less than 1.  The mean deviation is 0.47.

Another accepted theory on prokaryotes is that translation of ribosomal proteins
is especially fast, since prokaryotes are riddled with ribosomes.  As such, we
hypothesized that ribosomal proteins should exhibit even lower displacement deviations.
As this boxplot indicates, computational data verified this hypothesis.

We then validated our model against experiments conducted on recombinant bovine 
growth hormone--the ones we mentioned briefly at the beginning of our presentation.
In 1984, Schoner created a set of 8 sequences designed to produce bGH.  Four of
them had high yields, while four of them had relatively low yields.  In his paper,
Schoner mentioned that these sequences were, in fact, translationally regulated.
As such, we hypothesized that the sequences that had high yields should have
relatively low displacement deviations.  This displacement plot shows all eight
sequences plotted on the same set of axes.  As you can see, there exists a noticeable
difference between these sequences [point to ones at top] and the ones at the bottom.
In fact, the sequences that remain close to the horizontal axis are the ones that
Schoner found to have high yield.  With the exception of one sequence, the low yield
proteins stray from the zero axis.

Finally, we tested our model's ability to predict frameshifts in sequences.
In 1987, Robert Weiss designed a set of about forty constructs--variation of prfB.
Using beta-galactosidase activity as an indirect measure of frameshifting rate,
he analyzed each one of these sequences.  We decided to correlate the results of
our model, using our error-free rate metric, with those of Weiss.  As this boxplot
indicates, our model can separate Weiss's constructs into those with low and
those with high yields, although with a few stray sequences that require additional
analysis.

Of course, there is an urgent need to conduct more studies on this model.  During
the last few weeks of our research, we designed a short sequence that we predict
will frameshift.  With the help of Mr. Robert Snyder, a graduate student responsible
for the lab work, we have designed a construct that will allow us to measure
the frameshifting frequency of this sequence.  We are happy to note that in the
past few weeks, the lab work has been well under way.

The further the development of this model, we need to study the outliers in the bGH
and Weiss experiments.  Studying reasons for why they did not follow the predictions
may lead us to study better methods of parameter estimation--beyond the genetic
algorithm we developed.  In addition, recent research done in the Agris lab suggests
that the shape of the tRNA molecule may affect its binding to the ribosome, a
finding that has direct impact in the probability calculations in our model.  Also,
it may prove beneficial to go beyond Starmer's work and consider hybridization
that does not follow the Watson-Crick rules.

In summary, we have synthesized biological concepts, the fundamental principles of physics,
and probability theory to develop a stochastic model that promises to be useful in predicting
translational efficiency.  We have tested the model on a number of data sets, including
ecoli genes and artifically created ones.  We have created a genetic algorithm that may
aid in parameter estimation--a branch of our model that will become increasingly important
as more data is collected.  All of the work we did can be easily reproduced,
since all our Perl and Matlab code is freely avaliable on the internet, with detailed
documentation.

We envision that this model, with necessary improvements, will offer a very efficient
and very cost-effective method for designing constructs to produce useful proteins on a commercial
scale.

We would like to thank Dr. Bitzer and Dr. Stomp of NCSU for their constant support.
Dr. Breidt and Robert for helping us with lab work.  Dr. Ponnala for explaining his 
initial model to us, on which we built ours.  Dr. Vouk for Matlab access.  Thank you
for your time and patience.
