Hello, ladies and women. We're going to talk today about a computational model 
we developed in a year-long effort to refine a model of translational efficiency 
and frameshifts in Escherichia coli.
 
Using a synthesis of molecular cell biology and the physics of free energy, our 
model can predict quite accurately the protein yield of a given gene 
sequence for a protein sequence in E. coli. Therefore, our model could be immensely 
useful in the industry of mass protein production, which touches the spheres of 
medicine, agriculture, and industry. For example, we investigated bovine growth 
hormone in the course of correlating experimental results with our model's predictions.
 
First, we'd like to briefly review ribosomal translation. The ribosome organelle 
binds to the mRNA strand, copied from DNA previously during transcription. As it moves down the 
strand--potentially frameshifting [CADENCE OF DANGER]--transfer RNAs that match the codon 
in the previous, current, and next frames (the A, P, and E frames, respectively) bring amino acids to 
the ribosome, creating the polypeptide strand. From the hybridization between 
the mRNA and a certain rRNA strand, free energy arises, modelled by Joshua Starmer and measured 
by Susan Freier. Starmer recognized a periodicity of the free energy signal in constructing 
a periodogram of it based on a Fourier transform of said signal.
 
Surprisingly, the periodicity occurs at 1/3 cycles or three nucleotides, implying the period 
of the free energy signal is exactly one codon. Therefore, free energy can serve as a 
correcting mechanism for mistakes made by the ribosome, which will undoubtedly occur inside a busy cell 
environment. Taking the derivative of the energy signal with respect to codon distance
 along the mRNA strand, we arrive at the force that guides the ribosome during translation.
 
Due to the periodicity of the signal, Starmer chose to model it with a sinusoidal function, which Ponnala used
 to model displacement from the normal reading frame--the zero frame.
 
In order to test the extent to which our model and metrics correlate with experimental data,
we conducted a series of investigations, using data collected from previous research.

Our first investigation involves a look a large portion of the genes present naturally
in E coli.  Most biologists contend that translation in prokaryotes is an efficient process;
therefore, it would make sense that the vast majority of proteins in E coli should
exhibit low displacement deviations.  We thus selected a sample of 4364 sequences,
from a list given by the Ecogene database, and calculated their displacement deviations,
running 500 iterations on each gene.  This histogram tabulates the results.  As you can
see, over 90% of proteins have a deviation less than 1.  The mean deviation is 0.47.

Another accepted theory on prokaryotes is that translation of ribosomal proteins
is especially fast, since prokaryotes are riddled with ribosomes.  As such, we
hypothesized that ribosomal proteins should exhibit even lower displacement deviations.
As this boxplot indicates, computational data verified this hypothesis.

We then validated our model against experiments conducted on recombinant bovine 
growth hormone--the ones we mentioned briefly at the beginning of our presentation.
In 1984, Schoner created a set of 8 sequences designed to produce bGH.  Four of
them had high yields, while four of them had relatively low yields.  In his paper,
Schoner mentioned that these sequences were, in fact, translationally regulated.
As such, we hypothesized that the sequences that had high yields should have
relatively low displacement deviations.  This displacement plot shows all eight
sequences plotted on the same set of axes.  As you can see, there exists a noticeable
difference between these sequences [point to ones at top] and the ones at the bottom.
In fact, the sequences that remain close to the horizontal axis are the ones that
Schoner found to have high yield.  With the exception of one sequence, the low yield
proteins stray from the zero axis.

Finally, we tested our model's ability to predict frameshifts in sequences.
In 1987, Robert Weiss designed a set of about forty constructs--variation of prfB.
Using beta-galactosidase activity as an indirect measure of frameshifting rate,
he analyzed each one of these sequences.  We decided to correlate the results of
our model, using our error-free rate metric, with those of Weiss.  As this boxplot
indicates, our model can separate Weiss's constructs into those with low and
those with high yields, although with a few stray sequences that require additional
analysis.